***********
Hello World
***********

In this section, we will discuss some basic concepts of C++.

3.4.1. Builtin Integer Types
----------------------------

C++ has a number of builtin integer types.

.. code:: cpp

   int main() {

   }

3.4.2. Sized Types
------------------

3.4.3. Structs
--------------

3.4.4. Conditional Statements
-----------------------------

3.4.5. Loop Statements
----------------------

3.4.6. Macros
-------------

3.4.7. Memory Allocation + Pointers
-----------------------------------

3.4.8. Files and I/O
--------------------

3.4.9. Functions & References
-----------------------------

3.4.10. Example: Kitchen Fire Investigation
-------------------------------------------

Pretend we are insurance auditors. We are investigating a kitchen fire
which burned down a popular Chicago restaurant: O’leary Smoke House.
Fortunately the entire city didn’t burn down this time.

The restaurant had a smart thermometer which was tracking the
temperature and carbon monoxide (CO) level of the kitchen. We want to
analyze the dataset to determine the following: 1. When did the fire
start and end? We assume the fire is started when the temperature is at
least 80 Farenheit OR the CO level is 200ppm. 2. What was the average
temperature during the fire? 3. What was the average CO level during the
fire?

The dataset contains atmospheric readings for every minute of the
24-hour day. There are 1,440 minutes in a day. Each reading contains two
entries: (Temperature, Carbon Monoxide).

::
