C/C++ are the main programming languages used for modern HPC programs. While
this is also evolving, this is the current standard.

We will walk through the basics of compiling C++ software and the basics
of C++ programming.

# 3.1.1. Choosing a Compiler

There are many C++ compilers.
1. **GNU compiler collection (GCC)**: The standard C/C++ compiler provided
on most Linux systems. Linux-only.
2. **Clang**: Clang provides various extensions that can be used to build
custom compiler add-ons. Cross-platform. Standard on Mac.
3. **Microsoft Visual C++ (MSVC)**: The standard C/C++ compiler for Windows.
4. **Intel Compiler**: Sometimes used. Optimizations for intel products.
5. **MinGW**: Like gcc, except works on Windows.

Generally, we prioritize compiling for Linux systems. This means we typically
focus on gcc and occasionally clang. Clang is a more modern compiler with
many advanced features and better warnings and error messages. However,
we generally focus on gcc.

# 3.1.2. Hello World

In this example, we will demonstrate how print text to a terminal. One of the
main use of printing is for debugging. Tools such as [Google
Logger](https://github.com/google/glog), are used to make print statements to
help determine where a program crashes, without having to use an expensive
debugger all the time.

# 3.1.3. Setup

```bash
cd ${SCS_TUTORIAL}/3.2.hello_world
```

# 3.1.4. C++ Source File

Below is the code in [hello_world.cc](https://github.com/scs-lab/scs-tutorial/blob/main/3.1.hello_world/hello_world.cc).
```cpp
#include <stdio.h>
#include <iostream>

int main() {
  printf("Hello world 0\n");
  std::cout << "hello world 1" << std::endl;
  return 0;
}
```

# 3.1.5. C++ Header Files

```cpp
#include <stdio.h>
#include <iostream>
```

\#include is used to instruct the C++ compiler where to find **header files**.
In our case, the header files being included are "stdio.h" and "iostream".
Header files typically contain the definitions of functions. They have the same
syntax as a **source file**, but they don't typically have as much code logic.

To find header files, compilers will search a number of places. For example, "/usr/include" will typically contain "stdio.h" and "/usr/include/c++" may contain iostream. These paths are subject to change depending on the gcc version and OS.

In our case, "stdio.h" is where *printf* is defined, and "iostream" is where
*std::cout* is defined.

# 3.1.6. Program start

```cpp
int main() {
  // code here...
}
```

The main function is required in order to execute a C++ program. When you
launch a program, the main function is where the code execution begins every
time.

# 3.1.7. Console output
```cpp
printf("Hello world 0\n");
std::cout << "Hello world 1" << std::endl;
```

1. Text is always in double quotes ""
2. "\n" in "Hello world 0" means "new line". Analagous to hitting the enter key on your keboard in a text editor.
3. std::cout uses left shift operator (<<) to print to console
4. std::endl is equivalent to '\n'
3. printf takes the text as a function parameter

Both printf and cout are valid ways of printing. Typically cout is preferred
in C++ programs, but you'll likely see both in example programs.

# 3.1.8. Program return

```cpp
int main() {
  // code here...
  return 0;
}
```

Main returns an integer "int". This indicates the success or failure of
a program. Generally, a return value of "0" indicates the program succeeded.
Any other value indicates a failure and the reason for failure.

# 3.1.9. Building

We will build this code manually using gcc.  It is generally a bad idea to
compile things manually, but the knowledge of how the compiler is called will be
helpful.

Here we will use gcc to compile the program "hello_world.cc".
```bash
g++ hello_world.cc -o hello_world
```

This will produce an executable file called "hello_world". To run the
code:
```bash
./hello_world
```

The output will be:
```bash
hello world 0
hello world 1
```

To view the return code of the program in Linux:
```bash
$?
```

The output will be
```bash
0
```
which is what we returned using the *return* statement
